# Hearing the unheard, seeing the unseen:Automated sign language recognition for emergency situations


Deaf-mute people primarily communicate via manual-visual modality through sign language and hand gestures. Although these communities use sign language
to communicate among themselves, there still exists a serious communication gap with normal people and this gap pushes the deaf-mute community towards isolation and creates hindrance towards their personal safety. Moreover, there are huge chances of the deaf-mute community getting underserved in the case of emergencies due to the communication gap. To bridge this gap for such scenarios, we propose an automated system which can recognize dynamic hand gestures for Indian Sign Language(ISL) in emergency cases. This system would have the capability of classifying ISL gestures into eight emergency words (namely, 'accident', 'call', 'doctor', 'help', 'hot', 'lose', 'pain' and 'thief'). As an extended functionality, we further intend to perform real-time automated monitoring for emergency related sign language recognition using the CCTV cameras. 

For the previous solutions, the feature extraction was performed by detecting only the global level features using pretrained CNN models. Moreover, the most recent work comprised of detecting both local and global features using computer vision algorithms and pretrained CNN models respectively. This recent approach added an extra overhead by implementing multiple techniques for local feature extraction. With our proposed solution, we plan to make use of pretrained vision transformers which implement the multi headed attention mechanism, and therefore, there is no need to perform local and global level feature extraction separately. Thus, our approach not only focuses on extracting global features but also focuses on extracting local features without using multiple algorithms/techniques.

We are proposing an automated sign language recognition system which can detect emergency related sign language gestures from video footage. The key frames extracted from the video would be passed through an encoder of a vision transformer(ViT) to extract feature(attention) maps. These feature maps would then be fed into a Bidirectional LSTM model for classi cation of long-range sequences of sign language gestures into one of the eight categories of emergency words.
